#summary Example program/snippets demonstrating functionality
#labels Phase-Requirements,Phase-Design,Featured

= Introduction =

Example program/snippets demonstrating functionality

= Keywords = 
== Predefined Events  == 
Actions can be provided to zero, many, or all of these predefined event hooks.

  each _EVENT_ {IMPLICIT PARAMETER}

  each _generation_ occurs as an entire iteration happens

  each _mutation_ occurs at the mutation stage 

  each _mating_ occurs at the mating stage

  each _selection_ occurs at the selection stage

  each _organism constructed_ {organism} occurs as a single organism is created.  Initial creation-inclusive.

  each _organism killed_ {organism} occurs as a single organism is removed from the population.

  each _organism mutated_ {organism} occurs as a single organism is randomly mutated.

  each _organism mates with organism_ {organismA organismB} occurs when two organisms recombine to construct a new organism.

  each _child born_ {organism} occurs as a single organism is created through mating. Initial creation-exclusive.

  each _organism fitness changes_ {organism} occurs as the fitness of an organism changes.

*Example:*
{{{
each organism killed:
   print "killing " . organism.fitness
}}}

== Debugging Modifiers == 
Defines at relative to an event the execution of an action.

  _before_ hooks action to pre-event

  _after_ *default* hooks action to post-event

*Example:*
{{{
before each selection:
  print "before selection, current population size: " . populationSize

after each selection:
  print "after selection, current population size: " . populationSize
}}}


== Environmental Parameters ==
Global parameters that should be re-evaluated `each generation`.
Read-only accessible at all points of the simulation flow.

  _populationSize_ defines the total population after mating.

  _topParentPool_ defines the elite subset from which to mate.

  _bottomParentPool_ defines the highly suboptimal subset from which to mate, to improve genetic differentiation.

  _organismLifespan_ defines the lifespan of a single organism.

  _mutationRate_ defines the probability of mutation on a per-organism basis.

*Example:*
{{{
each generation:
  populationSize *=  1.05
}}}


== Environmental Variables/Descriptors ==
Global parameters that should are re-evaluated by the compiler at `each generation`.
Read-only accessible at all points of the simulation flow.

  PARAMETER {TYPE}

  _averageFitness_ {value} describes the average fitness of the population.

  _averageAge_ {value} describes the average age of the population.

  _maxFitness_ {organism} describes the top organism in the current population.

  _minFitness_ {organism} describes the bottom organism in the current population.

  _oldest_ {organism} describes the oldest organism in the current population.

  _maxFitnessAllTime_ {organism} describes  the top organism ever encountered.

  _minFitnessAllTime_ {organism} describes the bottom organism ever encountered.

*Example:*
{{{
each generation:
  print "best solution thus far: " . maxFitnessAllTime
}}}


== Functions/Operators ==

  _to ACTION NAME_ defines a new subroutine/function. I have no idea how parameters are passed. Closures? 
ACTION NAME should be a camelCased single world.  How is an action called?

*example*
{{{
to printTopSolution:
  print "best solution thus far: " . maxFitnessAllTime

each generation:
  printTopSolution
}}} 

=== List operators ===
{{{
first()
last()
max()
min() 
sum()
average() 
append()
extend()
pop() 
push() 
index() 
for..in..
reverse() 
filter() 
search() 
sort()
}}}

=== Chromosome Operators ===
`splice [at \d[%] [and \d]]`  on two implicit chromosomes

*example*
{{{
to mate:
  splice at 5 and 15
}}}

=== Required Actions===
  _to construct_ {chromosome} should create a new, initial chromosome. Often random.

  _to mate_ {chromosomeA chromosomeB} should define how to recombine chromosomes to form a new chromosome.

  _to mutate_ {chromosomeA chromosomeB} should define how to recombine a chromosome with a newly-constructed chromosome, yielding a mutated chromosome.

  _to get fitness_ {chromosome} should define the calculation of fitness for a chromosome.


= Snippets =

{{{
to construct organism:
    (global organism.count)
    name = count;  // dynamic construction
    fingers = 10;  // random construction
    for gene in chromosome:
        gene.x = gene.count;
        gene.y = random; // automatic typing


to mate male and female:
    splice [at 5[%] [and 10]]

to mutate organism:
    // mate with implicit random organism

each generation:
        population_size = population_size *= 1.01
        // etc.
        // these variable are evaluated each generation

// debugging statements
before organism killed:
    print "killing organism"

after mutations:
    print "done with mutations"
}}}